Okay, we're talking to Gene Smith.
I'm sorry, Gene, we're just telling you, we're just walking.
These are sakli.
They're for initiation.
You know, the Rama holds them up in front of you and says, hey, this is a guy you should meet.
And these are painted and cut, and then they're used and pasted on the cards.
Well, they actually print them like this.
so that they can do lots of cards.
But how do they use them, though, is the question.
It's like, well, how do they function?
Well, this is a particular type of, you know, to tell an explanation.
An explanation of?
Of a particular initiation.
So this, these are all from the northern Tharama tradition, and they're, uh,
I'll show you what they look like when they're painted.
The pictures I took in New York, by the way, were great too.
I brought along the text of my interview with you a couple of years ago.
It was a 20-page single space.
Hi, this is Jeff Waller.
Hi, Jeff.
Hi.
Pleasure to meet you.
We took some photographs.
Maybe it's still upstairs.
Oh, well.
We'll find it.
I'm just showing Nick around.
Here's your book.
I've got another one for you.
I've got one for you.
The more recent one, which is—actually, you were going to be in this one, but this book got to be too big.
Oh, well.
This is still 636 pages.
Anyway, just leave it there.
I'm going to take this because I've got my notes and stuff in here.
So this is just a provisional home for you right now?
And you already have your accommodations?
Yeah.
We'll start here.
The books are arranged by
by set.
So these are the Satya and these are the Kagyu.
The Spentans have four traditions.
How do you spell words like this?
S-A-K-Y-A, Satya.
And these are Kagyu.
Okay, and how do you spell that?
K-A-G-Y-U.
There are four Buddhist traditions and one non-Buddhist.
Have you seen this book, by the way?
It's one of the finest books I think ever done.
What is it?
Could you just tell me briefly?
Well, it's the thinking of a guy named Schuster.
Carl Schuster.
C-A-R-L.
S-C-H-U-S-E-R.
And he was one of the great minds of our time.
This is published by the Rock Foundation and can't carefully design all of these logins.
Now, is this your room in here, Gene?
No, this is the room of a gal who's doing her
degree in sustainable international development at Brown.
She needs a place to stay, and so... But the point is, you live among your collections, right?
That's right.
These are so colorful, I have to say.
So, Sakya.
And... Sorry, I didn't love my book.
Sorry, I haven't seen that piece since Saturday.
I'll give it to you.
We're getting these books ready to go.
We've got a young student coming in to wrap them.
Could you explain the colorful coverings, the sheets?
Books like any image, or like images need clothing.
These are clothing for them.
You have to periodically change it.
You shouldn't have books uncovered.
It's for the preservation aspect?
Yeah, it also works for the preservation, but it's a sign of respect.
You shouldn't have them on the floor either, so don't... And the books, all of these, they're like accordion shapes, right?
No, they're not accordion shapes.
They're just loose leaf.
I guess it is a codex if it's loose leaf.
Is it a codex type of a book?
I suppose you'd call it that.
This was done last year.
No, this is a printed book, a recently printed book.
Uh-uh.
Still done in a traditional manner.
Yep.
Is the shape important?
I mean, could it be done as a book as we know it in the Western sense?
Could it be printed?
Yeah, the Tibetans have two types of books.
One is what's called the Depter.
It comes from the Turkish, well, actually the Persian Dapta.
And that's D-E-B.
D-E-B.
D-E-R.
And those books are stitched along the top.
The other kind of book are Pothi's, and these are loose-leaf.
P-O-T-H-I.
Pothi.
Tibetans traditionally didn't like the Western-style book, although they have started to use them.
However, when we talk about the book as artifact, because you are putting so much stuff on the Internet, does it matter the shape that it comes in?
I don't know.
Come and meet.
I understand.
I want you to meet somebody who's been in a moment, somebody who's been here scanning for the last two months.
This is Gelugpa, spelled G-E-L-U-G, or G-E-L-U-G-P-A.
These blue ones... And what are they?
Are you going to come here?
dominant sect of the tibetan tradition the dalai lama uh this is the yellow hats they're called sometimes these are bumbo these are non-buddhas and let me introduce you to oh he's been scanning the last uh
So is this all staff or volunteers that you have here?
Katerp is a Bunbo himself, and he's just completed scanning 101 volumes.
Wow.
Which he's taking back with him to... We gave it to him, and we're making some CDs, so it helps them... They take them back to where... Yeah.
So we can raise money for their library.
We're not interested in these.
Bumbo things because we're a Buddhist center.
But he's been doing them.
But you have them.
Yeah.
And we've been working with the Glenn Foundation in New York.
We have them.
But there's just so much.
There's only so much we can do.
These are what these cards look like when they're painted.
The cards you just showed me in the first row.
And this explains what the deity is.
So, this is one that we've recently done.
This is a book that you printed or published?
I work at Wisdom Publications.
They're the publisher of this book?
Right.
Wow.
Deities of Tibetan Buddhism.
Right.
It's a beautifully produced book, let me say.
Hi, my name is Nick.
How are you?
Where's your picture?
He's just completed.
Uh-huh.
He's been here at the suggestion of his uncle, who's the grand abbot of all the buttholes, and the Brunn Foundation, and has been scanning 101.
Wow.
He completed 101 volumes.
Isn't that amazing?
And you check every page, of course.
Every page.
This is where he's been working for the last three months.
This is the scanner over here.
Well, we've got this scanner, we've got this little tiny scanner, and then this is our newest acquisition.
It's a $700 jobby.
And the pages just run through.
Okay.
That's one good thing that you have a loose-leaf page.
You don't have to mispline the book or anything like that.
Nice to meet you.
He's just leaving.
He's getting Acrobat on his computer so he can read it.
How long did it take him to do the 101 books?
Three weeks.
Three months.
So it can be a pretty tedious process then.
It is a tedious process.
I don't see my sense of timing.
The Exquisite Times is here.
Isn't that something?
I'll show you what he's been doing.
And then we get the book
coming in on CDs from India.
They're scanning there as well.
So you've been here for about four years, right?
Yeah.
Do you have a pretty good catalog of what you have?
Do you have ours up here in a sense of what you have in-house?
Let me show you the website.
And what we're doing.
I'm just working on the product that Peter has done.
We have to be able to get them into the system.
And these are the books that you scanned.
These are our title pages because you have to be able to catalog them.
And then we provide the cataloging for the ink print.
That's from the Library of Congress.
If you can't get a Library of Congress, we create one, a surrogate.
Okay, so this is our website.
As I told you, we're trying to build an encyclopedia of Tibet on the web.
We're working with other organizations who are like-minded.
This is our website.
This tells us something about the books.
Which I've been to.
You can just type in here.
Let's say we type in E8 and the name of E8.
Wow.
And then this will take us, it will return his biography.
Ah, it's very slow.
Do you get a lot of, can you record that with hits?
Oh yeah.
From all over the world.
Great.
And here, I'm looking for this particular person.
This was the eighth head of the Karma Kagyu sect.
He has his birthday, his death date, his primary title.
Paul's name, variations, everything that he wrote, and we can go to any one of the titles he wrote, and we'll find out where it is.
And then, these are his teachers, with links to all of the teachers, links to all of the students, his family relationships, father, mother, and this is why
And then these are from the Rubin website.
They're building a museum.
Donald and Shelley Rubin are a remarkable couple.
They started collecting tankas.
They're not Buddhist.
They simply just started, because they like them.
It's a collectible for them, I'm sure.
It's a collectible.
But they're passionate about it.
I was about to say it's a passion as well.
Yes.
And where are they from?
They're in New York.
And then this goes to their site.
And then we can just zoom in on it.
And it's a marvelous system.
So we're building these two together.
Right now, we only have the art and the book.
We've got places on our site.
Another thing that we're working with is the University of Virginia, where they're building a great ability to put multimedia up to that on the web.
Because that's the way we're... Now, are they teaching?
This is part of the curriculum down there?
So we go up to there.
And then we gave them the scans.
So here we go to their collection.
This is something about their collection.
And we'll go to... There was a fellow that I met in New York at that gathering that was from UVA.
Yes.
David Germano?
Could have been David Germano.
Wasn't a fellow named Paul?
Oh, Paul Hackett.
Was he from UVA as well?
Yes, that's right.
He is, say, doing very well.
But the principal contact down there would be Germano?
David Germano.
Okay.
And you see here is on the East Level cataloging.
And so we can navigate to a particular chapter of the book.
Now, can somebody like me just go in and browse and find these things?
If you don't know the name, I mean... No, no.
We're trying now to make it more common sense.
There, you see, is the product of our scans.
And...
So for you, this quest is really preservation of information and material.
I mean, the artifact is important, to be sure.
But it's not the end.
But you're driven by preserving culture and information.
The cultural identity of a people.
By whatever means possible, and this is state-of-the-art.
So we're working with Virginia.
We give them the scans and they put it on the web.
The next thing we're going to do is start putting some of our own scans on the web.
That's what we're doing upstairs.
We saw the books on the floor, unfortunately.
I won't tell.
You probably want to look at some.
We do have a lot of rare books there.
It was a rare book.
We were never able to... I've always been afraid that something happened to me.
So once we're able to scan these, we'll be able to distribute them to everybody.
No, no, that's all right.
This is...
We've now completed about 2,000 volumes.
And here are the volumes that we have done so far.
And we scan them as TIFF, T-I-F-F, Tagged Information Format.
These will last much longer.
Then we convert these.
Last to not understand.
This is the sort of standard format that everybody needs.
Technology changes.
In two years it could be absolutely inaccessible.
Somebody has to be migrating this stuff.
Am I right?
That's correct, and that's what we're doing.
So what we're doing is
we're just using.
The acrobat changes it to something that's more readable.
What's that rediscovered language?
A lot of Tibetan Buddhism is passionate.
Like I go out and I go to a place in the wilderness and I find a rock.
In that rock, if I look into it,
I will be able to decipher a whole book.
And so that's what it's about.
And that means rediscovered this teaching, was rediscovered by somebody we know from times we know, purportedly buried in the times gone by.
Are we talking about an actual artifact rediscovered, or it's defined in some other way?
It's probably defined in some other way.
We're not sure.
And these are texts.
For example, we're getting ready to put on a CD.
These are all hidden teachings.
Now, that's a cycle of good practice recovered from... No, it should.
It should.
It's a... It's not good.
It's a C-C, capital G, C-O-D-D.
A cycle of could... How do you pronounce that?
Should.
Should practice.
Rediscovered.
Recovered.
Place of concealment.
by Terchen Dorje Lingpa.
We produce from a rare manuscript preserved at Ugin Chirling in Boomtown.
But that's an item that you have here.
Yes.
No, we had it printed in India.
Now we're turning it into a CD.
I see.
And the princess of this palace, Ugin Chirling, has got somebody there cataloging her great collection.
We just did.
We only published about 30 volumes from it.
But, you know, a Tibetan is now there at the Ugin Chirling Palace.
And that is where?
Ugin Chirling?
It's in Bhutan in Bhutan.
And he's cataloging this collection.
So prior to it being copied here, it existed in one manuscript copy?
One manuscript copy.
There is one.
Here it is.
And that's March 202, so... See, this is the manuscript.
And so this is what Mr. Kader has been scanning.
Okay.
So we're... All of this is from this palace.
Now, these aren't
Again, these are not scanned from materials that you have here.
Oh, they're scanned from materials we have here that we published in India.
We got the manuscripts down from Bhutan, selected some, and then we published them.
So you copy them here.
For example, here, this is the title page for the... This was published in 1984.
P-H-I-M-P-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-T-H-U-
And this is the Library of Congress cataloging.
So if I were to go to the LC catalog and punch in 849-01-308, this would pop up.
This would pop up.
And I'll get all the information I need in terms of spellings and stuff.
Right.
By going there.
That's right.
Instead of trying to write it down, all I need is that LC number.
LC control number.
And we've just done an interesting project.
on illustrated direct books.
We have been working with a big ceremony that's going on out in Austin, Texas, where a High Lama has come, the head of one sect, the Ningua sect, has come to teach
this rare set of teaching.
This is the stories of this little visionary boy who was 13 years old.
He started having probably migraines.
All of this stuff was coming out of his head.
And he found, fortunately, a sympathetic adult, Lama, who started recording.
what the kid said.
And the kid just continued to babble.
And these were recorded in thirteen volumes.
This was really a difficult thing to find.
It happened in 1983?
No, that was when we found the copy.
You found it.
So that's when you were still with L.C.
So what we had was, this is the title page for the original.
It was published by His Holiness Dingo Kenze of Bhutan, and the Venerable Pema Norbu Rinpoche of Mysore, and the only set that was in existence then.
Hey Leonard!
Let me introduce you to Nick.
I was just telling you about the Nam Chu and how it was found.
And that's the Nam Chu there?
And I, the Sky Teacher.
How would I find a record for this NLC?
Well, at first I can deal with it.
I'm just going to write it.
I'll take the number.
Maybe we didn't.
Yeah, just G-N-A-M.
G-N-A-M.
C-H-O-S.
And it was published in India.
actually from Bhutan, but the copies had been lost.
And it turned out that it was a French traveler, André Migault, who happened on this monastery, this hermitage, when they were still carving it.
Wow.
And he thought it was missed if he had all these pictures in it.
Really weird pictures.
I'll show you some.
And so he bought a copy, he bought a set of these, and took them back and put them in the Musée Guinée in Paris, where they sat.
And where, about when is it?
1940.
Yeah, 1940.
He was, his partner was killed by the bandits at that time.
But he had these in... Did you ever meet them?
He did by the time I got to him.
These were there.
And then Mathieu Ricard, a French monk, who was a student of Kinzer, in which case, was able to borrow, to make photocopies of the originals from Paris.
And then the Lama sent in his student to get the rest of it.
Everybody thought the blocks had been destroyed.
But the villagers had never been paid for the carving.
So they didn't turn them over.
They didn't get burned.
So Lama Kutsang went there, and they were very suspicious of it.
There was a little hermit, it was called Muxan.
He went there and he said that, you know, there used to be a set of blocks for these teachings here.
If you have them, no.
What was this?
No.
And then, because the set in Paris was incomplete, he finally got them to admit that it was.
They were not necessarily destroyed.
And then when they found out that he was the servant of the head of the monastery, that they permissioned him, they said, well, before we tell you where they are, you've got to pay us.
And how long has it been?
Forty years.
With no interest involved?
So the blacks were found and printed.
and they were then re-produced from India.
We are still missing a few pages, but let's see if I can find some pictures.
So this is a whole collection?
So you made a copy of this, and then you scanned it and put it on your site?
Oh, we haven't put it on our site.
It will be there.
So I can't go look this up then?
No, I see it.
It's all pictures.
No, it's not on the site, because we don't have the web space.
But it's just filled with strange pictures.
Well, could you print out the title page of that for me, possibly?
Sure.
That would help.
I mean, this is interesting.
I love these stories.
Anyway, that's more of what brought you.
We've just done this for
one of our board members who just sponsored this great ceremony.
Printing the whole thing.
You don't want that.
No, I don't want that.
That would cancel.
I know.
Just want to print the page.
But it does have an LC controller, doesn't it?
Yeah.
All right, gee.
Just turn it off, obviously.
I'll take any of that.
I use everything in here.
It's in French.
Well, Leonard is the president of the organization.
I see.
So, Leonard, I'm sorry, did I get your last name?
Oh, my God.
I'm sorry.
And could you spell it?
V-A-N-D-E-R-K-U-I-J-P.
Three words.
And we set this up.
Set what up?
I'm sorry.
The QVRC.
I see.
Basically, the purpose is to build a database
so that you can find things.
Right now, Tibetan studies is vastly serendipitous.
You have to remember.
We have to remember what we've read.
And, uh, and then to make available to everybody, uh, look, why don't we go in there and sit?
Okay.
Okay, this is, uh, yeah.
And Nick Wipps from Glass Beyond You.
Yeah, amazing, yeah.
It's the same county, everything.
Same weather.
Exactly.
Today's the 17th, right?
I'm going to Ann Arbor on Wednesday, which is the 19th.
What are you doing at Ann Arbor?
I'm giving a lecture at the university on this book and the one that's coming out.
This book is fun.
I had planned, the original manuscript that I submitted for this book had 300,000 books.
It's 18 chapters.
One of the most outstanding scholars on, you know, who's a keen with computer technology.
He has a site
which you should probably know about, called Mitarta.
That would be?
N-I-T-A-R-T-H-A.
N-I-T-A-R-T-H-A dot org.
Dot org.
And he has all sorts of interesting stuff on it.
He is a, and we had probably some of his followers.
We're working with a Lama who's working with him.
They're doing a
Encyclopedia of Exceptional Terminology for the Web.
It's a very slow process, which involves taking texts that have been input and linking them together into a format where you can find out what the context of your terminology.
He is
And there was Paul Hackett, who has been down in New Mexico.
He was the person I wanted to use as a computer expert, but that was not to be.
He's working for lots of people in New Mexico, in Taos.
Entering this year, Columbia, for a graduate firm.
Yeah, a young fellow.
He was very good at computing.
There were nine people there.
There was one, as I later learned, one very senior revered Lama there, a fellow to my left.
And we were talking, and Gene says, well, maybe we should just tell him who this guy is.
Because I was asking very naive questions.
I said, well, listen.
He was born in India, I guess.
He was born outside of Tibet.
I didn't get his name, because I couldn't... This was July 28th, 1998, because I've got the date here.
This is before I came.
In New York.
I said, here, my Jew now wants to cool me in about this man's background.
And you say, he is a reincarnation, a very, very important Lama.
And also, then I couldn't
and we take care of you.
You are my son.
Your duties in the future is to preserve our lineage, our culture.
And his teacher passed away, and he is sort of evident among the young generation.
But who that person is... Oh, that's Odin Tongu.
Tongu was standing over the background.
So to his previous incarnation, his duties to perform, he was brought up like father and son.
Thirdly, his own motivation, he feels very strongly dedicated.
I couldn't believe this person was telling me this.
The language was trying to translate.
He was born outside of Tibet.
He was born up in an atmosphere of Tibet.
I say, a Tibetan man speaking very difficult, so I just can't.
And I say, Gene says he will be able to help me when I call.
So here you are.
Yes, that's what you're going to say.
Those things work out.
I believe that, I mean, I'm a journalist by training and inclination, but I like to stick with stories over a period of years and follow them and see where they go.
So I think that waiting the four years is really good because you had just basically been out of L.C.
for a year at that point.
Well, for several years.
I think 97 or so is when you said you could out.
96, I think.
So you were still kind of finding your way in depth.
So here we are now, six years later, and you really do have—you know where you're going with this thing, it seems to me.
Well, maybe.
I don't know.
We're trying to get it up and running, and I think New York will give us more breathing room.
It's much easier to raise funds there, isn't it, sir?
Do you have your address?
Do you know where you're going to be?
Yes.
115.
Right.
5th Avenue.
Oh wow.
Okay.
7th floor.
Right.
We can start sending mail there.
Okay.
And the same email will go with you.
Yes.
And we will, the Rubens have bought the old Barneys building.
So the Rubens are helping here.
Well, they're giving us free space.
Plus, they'd be very kind if we funded our computer person.
Would it be worth my while to talk to both of them?
Oh yeah, because we're closely connected.
So how do I get in touch?
Give me an email address or telephone number or something?
This will work over a period of months.
Oh yeah, sure.
And my style is such, by the way, I'd be happy to let you read this before I submit it, especially where I'm dealing in areas that are, especially spellings and stuff like that, are also like grasp concepts.
I defer to the experts, if that's all right with you.
Sure.
I'm happy to...
You know, what you lose, by giving people an opportunity to read things sometimes, there's always a chance to say, geez, did I really say that?
You know, you have to quote me on that, you know.
And then I usually acquiesce, unless it's really something that I really feel is, anyway, there's never a problem with me.
Well, the only thing I've ever growled with is headlines, or you know, captions like that.
that one yesterday.
Was that near the top of the story, or was it deep in the story?
It was the headline.
I understand, but where did the writer discuss your background of the draft?
In your time, sir.
Yeah.
But did the writer deal with it near the top of the story?
No, she dealt with it as he was a peaceneg.
He was a peaceneg.
But then a resistor is a lot different than a peaceneg.
There is, yeah.
Who was the writer?
Barbara Stewart.
I don't know her.
Did she tell you that she was going to use that in her headline?
No, the writers have nothing to do with the headlines.
The writer doesn't know what the headline's going to be until they see it in the paper.
It's true.
And in fact, if she's hiding from me.
You haven't been able to catch her.
It's whoever was writing the heads that day on the desk.
It's unnecessarily provocative.
I was just giving you the needle a little bit is what it is.
A little bit, you know.
But I thought the story was, which I'll give you.
So tell me a little bit about your involvement in this project, if you like.
Yeah, I came here to this area in 1995 from Seattle.
I mean, first to Washington.
To do what?
To Steve Tsebetna here.
I see.
Tsebetna in Haitian.
And where did he teach?
At Harvard.
And I've been in that for about seven years.
And I've known Gene since 1982.
I have to go back 20 years.
Tell me something about him.
He's incredible.
How important is he to this?
To Tibetan studies in general.
He's kind of dean of modern Tibetan studies.
There's nobody in the world who knows as much about Tibet and Tibet anthropology of Gene.
How is this?
Of course, as an American, a former Mormon community, how can he know more than Tibetans, you know?
Is that possible?
It's very possible, and you'll find many Tibetans even deferring to him as well.
Really?
And now he's back, he doesn't want to hear this.
He's going to have to read about whatever he likes.
Does it all start with the preservation of text?
Yes.
We have two main aims with this TBRC, which was the brain job of Gene, and he's also the main person behind, of course.
He's the prime mover.
One is, for example, the database, which essentially means inputting what Gene knows,
What he knows or what he's gathered?
What he knows and what he's gathered.
So are you doing all the histories of him?
How are you extracting this from him?
He's typing all the information in, inputting information.
And writing books like this.
And then secondly, we hope to be able to scan, and we've been very successful so far, to scan all the available Tibetan books.
and ultimately put the entire corpus onto the website.
Is it fair to say that books would be lost at the point for Gene?
Well, Gene, and now you probably don't want to hear this again, but in the late 1960s, the Library of Congress put together, had this PL for 80 program, public law for 80, which essentially meant an exchange of books published in India for early grain shipments from the United States in the early 60s.
and Gino's instrumental in getting the Tibetan collection, the Tibetan books, which the Tibetan refugee community had transported across the border, either in Northern India or into Nepal or into Bhutan or Sikkim, I think Sikkim was a country at the time, to have them publish, print and publish their collections and make them part of this pre-offering program.
So it's mainly PL80.
Public law.
And it's mainly because of this particular program and Gene's foresight that we now have a number of libraries in the world, most of which are, of course, in the States, that have collections of between 7,000 and 8,000 volumes that were published under auspices of the PL80 program.
And that was Gene's branch office.
So in that respect, all of us who do Tibetan studies, whether we like it or not, and most of us don't mind at all, are indebted to Gene for having this idea.
Did you know what you were looking for, Gene, in terms of books specifically, or was it just mainly gathering stuff as you... No, I was very fortunate to have been at the University of Washington in Seattle when the Rockefeller program began.
The Rockefeller Foundation, in 1959, it was just after the Tibetans left.
They had the first conference.
And they decided to experiment and bring live Tibetans to nine, what, centers and see what would happen.
And, you know, many of these Tibetans had never lived without servants before.
And all over the world, huh?
Not only in the States?
It was in Europe as well.
Wow.
Yeah.
So they set up actually eight centers finally.
The ninth was to have been India, but the Indians hated each other so much and played politics.
It was never set up in India.
So there were nine aid centers, Japan, the United States, London, Paris,
Uh, Rome, Munich, uh, Leiden, uh, uh, Copenhagen.
Where else?
Bohem.
Bohem, you know, correct?
Munich.
Not Bohem?
No.
They came later, these Tibetans?
Yes, I see.
And they brought, they gave the funding to bring, uh, you know, a group of Tibetans to each of those centers.
the University of Washington got a very great bibliophile, the Daishin Rinpoche, to whom this book is dedicated.
Daishin Rinpoche was the tutor to the Sakya, Punso Poran, one of the royal houses of the Sakya sect.
And he said, well, to do our program, we need books.
Because we had, I think there were 12 or 13 books there.
So he said, why don't you go out to Europe and make photocopies?
You know, the one we didn't have photocopies was make microphones.
This was in the early 60s, huh?
You're not working for L.C.
yet?
No, no.
It was 1962.
Most of the Europeans would not let us have books, would not have us have copies.
Why?
I'm going to publish it.
Replication seems to be a dirty word, you know.
I mean, people, especially when you get into the manuscript field, they don't want people to cut it.
Especially in the academy.
That's exactly what I'm talking about, you know.
So, even though this family, father, had given the books to Professor, to Tucci, he was the worst.
Tucci, huh?
Yeah.
Who was the great .
He would not let copies of anything leave.
That's amazing.
You'll find an interesting chapter on him in a book edited by Don Lopez called Curators of the Buddha.
Curators?
Curators of the Buddha.
You know Don's first wife.
Of the what?
Curators?
Of the Buddha.
Curators.
Curators of the Buddha.
I'll be able to find this?
Yes.
I think it's Amazon.
Oh, yes, University of Chicago Cross.
Great.
So far.
Excellent.
So he wouldn't let us look at it.
He wouldn't look at it.
So we got a lot of books from the English were very easy, as were the Dutch.
The French were difficult.
Those were easy or difficult?
Easy.
That's good to hear.
And when we went back to, I went back to Seattle with, you know, a fairly insightful microphone in which they said, well, none of this refers specifically to the things you want to study.
You know, they're books, but I realized that there had to be a lot of books in order to,
to study.
So he, we sort of sat, I just sat every day at his feet from 1960 to when I came to come back from Europe to when I left in 80, 90, 65.
Just right wrote down what he said.
It was an unprecedented collaboration between the Tudent and one of the greatest
What's his name again?
He was very fortunate.
I just happened to be there at the time.
He was.
He said, go out to India.
He said, and he told me what to get.
But in the meantime, Gene published a two-volume bibliography of the manuscripts, published kind of semi-positively in Seattle.
I don't know.
Maybe it is.
I'm probably going to work on this this week.
So then the idea was to make them available and some of the European scholars, Tucci was furious that we were going to, he came to see me.
What, in Seattle?
No, in India.
He was allowed into India.
I did, after a long absence.
And he said, you shouldn't publish Pema Karpo.
He said, I'm going to publish it.
But it was the holders of the lineage.
He was like, you know, sort of their most important philosopher.
And ritual.
And I said, well, you know, it's their tradition, not ours.
And he didn't understand that.
So they published it.
But this was in the late 60s.
Yeah.
In the meantime, finally, Gene leaves this out, but in the meantime, he kind of, in a way, bummed around India and Nepal for a couple of years.
And then somehow, I don't know the background here, but somehow a lot of Congress hired him as a local hand.
A local hire.
Basically it was five rupees a month.
It was five hundred.
Can I just ask a question, if you don't mind?
thinking about your life at this point.
I mean, what were you studying or doing?
Staying out of the draft.
But that's a negative.
There has to be a positive.
I mean, what were you directing your life?
I had no role.
I know you've told me before you don't consider yourself a librarian.
No.
You still don't.
Or a bibliographer.
I asked you if you're driven or obsessed.
You said, no, I think you have to be driven.
Do you think he's driven?
Yeah.
He said he's not driven, but I know what I see.
But he's driven in a very positive way.
In a very positive way, but you're not an antiquarian with respect that you're collecting rarities because they're rare and they're precious.
I'm not interested.
You're looking for content, it seems to me.
Is that a fair statement?
Totally fair, because if you realize the kind of things that could have been bought
for apple and egg in the pond, India, from the Tibetan refugee community in the early 60s that were really treasures.
And why didn't you get the things for the apple and the orange?
It's because I didn't have the apples.
I mean, myself, I grabbed everything I could see, and you would too, I'm sure.
I've already done a few objects, but not so many.
I do get dizzy by effects.
No, thanks.
But Gene simply loves books, loves Tibetan books.
And Gene is there also a bit modest here, as usual, because not only did he study with Dijin, who was probably the former scholar of his age, and was interested in every kind of textual tradition that one could find in Tibet.
But he also studied with a number of the leading scholars of other traditions, other Tibetan Buddhist traditions as well.
So in that sense, Dean is kind of on a very unusual background.
And at what point do you start learning the language and really assimilating the culture, which everybody says that you know as much or more than anyone?
No, no.
It was largely because of the living with this family in Seattle when I was
at the center.
Like this guy who's here now, he's one of my oldest friends.
Kiddo.
He was the nephew of the guy who's become the Grand Abbot of all the Bumbos.
These are non-Buddhists.
And in a way I always joked about it.
You don't mind if I jump around in the questions, because I usually have to go with what I'm thinking or I'll forget it.
I saw it through on the tape recorder, but it's not a question.
It's a short-term memory.
You asked him whether he didn't mind you jumping around a little bit.
Right.
But just by the process of what you've been doing for 40 years, there are a number of great rarities here, though.
Very precious.
Not really.
I mean, there are texts that often were
who were given to me, like this.
Yeah, but what about the... This is kind of a pocketbook, a pocketbook Tibetan book.
But for instance, he has a copy of, and I've only seen one other copy in the library in Beijing, of one of the earliest Tibetan block prints, dated around 1300.
Wow.
And this is a block print of a Tibetan Buddhist esoteric text.
It's a translation of a Sanskrit original.
but this is the Tibetan translation, and was block printed by the imperial court in China of Mongol stock at around 1,300.
And he has a copy of that particular block.
The blocks, the wooden blocks, on which basis this print was printed, are gone.
So as far as I know, there may only be two prints, two imprints of that particular copy around, one of which is in the collection.
So another subject area I'm interested in
in this book that I'm working on.
It's not only preservation of content, but also the use of facsimiles and writing surfaces over extended periods.
Now, the blocks, the original blocks, just like Gutenberg's type was gone with the press.
Obviously, Shakespeare exists only in print.
We don't have any manuscripts.
This is kind of what you're talking about, right?
The earliest Tibetan block print that I know dates from 1283.
And the block, of course.
And the blocks are gone, but I've seen one print of that particular text.
And I also saw it in a library in Beijing.
This text was brought from one of the libraries in Tibet in the early 1960s.
This is not an interesting story.
I think the subtext here, of course, is the cultural revolution.
I mean, if there's no cultural revolution going on, there wouldn't be this
The sense of urgency involved?
Well, see, you know, we thought, when Leonard and I were there, that so much had been destroyed.
And, of course, there was a great deal that was destroyed.
Tibet, I don't know, you said once that you thought that Tibetans had... The capital was the most literate society in the world.
Yeah, right.
Based on, there's one census done in the 1260s.
And I think they were talking about maybe 250, 300,000 sedentary Tibetans in San Tivet.
And if you compare that to the average lama's output of about 15, 20 volumes per lama, per scholar, on such a kind of minute population base, you end up with a considerable amount of literacy.
Not only that, but also the nomads, the peasants,
And so all had to be at least, literally to the extent they could recite a prayer, recite prayers, or read a prayer from their prayer books, and perhaps more importantly, to read their contracts.
Because they always, they used to lease or belong, or they belong to land nobility or monstros.
For whom they worked there, for whom they heard of capital.
And who did, they did business, made business transactions, and to whom they paid, had to pay taxes.
Was there a deliberate policy to destroy this stuff, or was it mainly just... It was a disruption of the old, and it pertailed all throughout China.
I mean, the Chinese culture was terribly damaged by the Cultural Revolution.
But there were some very bright, interesting things that went on that we didn't know about in the 60s.
Zhou Enlai, one of his
I think an incredible act.
Yes.
Unbelievable.
He said, well, you know, we shouldn't destroy everything blindly.
He said this, though.
He said, what we should do is, he said we should follow the Russian model, where you have living museums.
You keep these living museums.
You keep the libraries.
You keep a few monks around.
Like a zoo, almost.
You know, he felt this was necessary, so he gave orders.
Nobody knew this at the time, of course, but he gave orders to... That each province of China could have one monastery, great monastery, untouched.
There would be guards on it, so that the Red Guards couldn't come and destroy it.
He chose
For the province of Gansu, he chose the monastery of Lebrac.
For the province of Qinghai, he chose the monastery of Kumbu.
In Sichuan, he chose Dege.
Each province was allowed to choose.
Is this documented any place?
Has this been written?
It could probably be found out.
We don't have the documents that he actually signed, I don't think, yet.
They're in the archives someplace.
But has somebody written about this that I could cite as a reference?
I'm not sure I can find out.
And then finally, he said, for the TAR, he said, we will keep the Potala, because that's important for China.
And it didn't seem to be a policy, but they didn't touch it.
Even though they touched Tachi Lumpo, which was the seat of the Panchet Lamas, they didn't touch Sakya, except cosmetically.
Well, the northern, the northern palace was gone.
But the southern, the Hakan Chela?
The Hakan Chela.
The main library state.
Which was a library that is, has been there since the 11th century.
Where is this again?
In Sakya, the west, the midwest of it.
How do you spell it?
N-A-K-Y-A.
And I spelled it for you upstairs.
Okay.
There's a good reason for it, though.
Because it is only with Sakya around that the Chinese can claim that that was part of China, at least during the monastery.
So it served their purposes.
And that's probably why they did the portal.
Totally.
But everywhere else, they let them run wild.
I read a statistic that anywhere from 3,000 to 5,000 monasteries were destroyed.
Oh, yeah.
Sure.
Monasteries, temples, chapels.
I've heard there were about 7,000 or so of them all over the Sven-Kolz area, and maybe 50.
How about books and elements of literature?
That's a big story.
That's another story, of course.
How much of this literature has been lost in the last 40 years?
Oh, an incredible amount has been lost.
How much rest did it begin with, and even more than an incredible amount?
And then we know now,
that so much was saved.
By this benign policy of Joe and Lye?
No, no, just by people who were— People.
By the locals.
They just put them in—like Caterford was telling me about this enormous Bumbo Lye Library in his area.
He comes from an area called, uh, uh, called Sharkwell.
And he said they had all of these books.
And nobody knew what was in them, whether they're Buddhist or Bumbo.
And the farmer, who had them, put them underneath the, at the top of the house, underneath the grass that they would feed to the animals.
Gee.
And this is one kind of anecdotal example that comes.
And he said,
You know, they were just there, and nobody's going to look underneath the grass.
And when Cater went there his last trip to China, he said, they said, do you want these?
They were still underneath the grass.
And he said, they're this long.
So he said, no.
He didn't figure he could take those with him.
And, I mean, books were magic to them.
They had a magic power.
And, you know, to destroy them means that you're losing something of yourself.
So, you had the fear of the red guard on the one side, and you had this idea that these were thin or
They had some sort of magical power, and some of it was sustained.
But the one thing that you should also remember is that the Red Guards were the only Chinese.
They're also named Tibetans who were the worst Red Guards were the Tibetans.
Let's be very clear about this.
There's not a very proper thing to say.
And that sounds terrible, really bad, because they knew what this stuff was.
They came from other areas.
They came from other areas, and they were looking for it too.
They knew what they were looking for.
And when they got to feed locals, they'd know where the chavos were, the small hermages, and they'd go in there and blow them up.
Oh, yeah.
So this is... That's why... So when we think about the Taliban blowing up the Buddha, it's that plus times... Yeah.
Whatever, you know.
Pick a number.
But the Tibetans themselves also were part of this.
That's the big problem that the Tibetans face now, that they also were part of this.
this entire spectacle.
Just like for me and Janice, who used to be Red Gargan and have a dot-com company somewhere in Worcester, Oregon.
Yeah.
I mean, I wasn't that young.
I was just 1962.
I was, how old was I?
Nineteen or whatever.
But I don't remember, I mean, was it reported that we were really destroying irrepressible cultural?
I mean, was this kind of lost in the
Well, I mean, when we think about today of the blowing up of the Buddhists, it's horrifying the world.
Well, about ten years.
Ten years.
That was a revolution.
Right.
And when I was a student, when I started doing Tibetan in early 1970, I heard these horror stories that everything was being blown up, and numerous Chinese were being moved into Tibet, and the Tibetans were on a verge of disappearing.
Of course, it wasn't true.
It wasn't really part of the truth.
The numerous Chinese never went to Tibet and never will go to Tibet.
It's a terrible place.
It's not the best place to be for the Chinese.
But it is true that the Red Guards, and not only the Chinese, but also many Tibetans, did blow up an awful lot.
And let's face it, I mean, Tibetan civilization without books, without monasteries, is a peasant culture.
It means because of the monasteries and their nomads.
And because of their highly different culture, if you take these two aspects away of their civilization, they end up with the peasants and nomads.
So the depth of the Tibetan civilization for that reason is very thin.
If we equate, which I don't think we should, but if one equates, in part, civilization with literacy and book culture involved.
There are all kinds of problems involved with that kind of equation as well.
To get back to the gathering of books, so you were gathering stuff for the Library of Congress on the one hand, except for yourself, too, which is very interesting.
No, the way it was for yourself, but for your own project was?
When the project began, there were these funds that could be used almost for anything.
We could have done bibliography projects.
We could have done anything.
We just didn't have the foresight to do it.
There was Congressman Dingell of Michigan, who's still there.
Yeah, he is.
A marvelous old man.
And he said, you know, we're exporting all this wheat.
We should get something for it.
And he said, why don't we set up a program where we can use the wheat money to increase Americans' knowledge of other countries.
So he set up these, you know, Dingle did this, huh?
Yes.
Fabulous.
So he's the author of the Public Law 480, usually with Public Law 480 legislation, which allowed for projects of cultural and, you know, cultural nature agreed to by both parties, could be part of this.
And so
Tibetan was not a special thing.
It was just, you know, we collected books in Sanskrit, in Arabic, in Indonesian, in all of these languages.
We had to catalog them because we could send them here.
It would just clog up the system.
So we set up these offices, which were called then public law for radio offices.
We had them in Israel.
We had them in Egypt, in Poland, in Yugoslavia.
in India, Indonesia, and these offices would buy books and send to libraries in the United States with cataloging so they could get them into the system.
And so this is where a lot of these big collections come from.
Each congressman could also nominate
libraries in his constituency to receive English language books from those countries that would help in understanding the host countries.
He was a very wise man.
So one of them was in the office, which had the most.
At one point we owed one out of every eight rupees in circulation.
We did.
Well, because we, we say, you know, we sold them wheat.
Wheat.
That's not very well known, that story.
Yeah, right, right.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan wrote the largest cheque ever written.
Now, he didn't write it, there's a trade, there's, uh, uh, yeah, giving, writing off the rupees
of the vast majority of the rupees that were owed to the U.S.
government, to the Indian government.
Was he a master?
Yes, he was a master.
He was a very wise man.
And because it just became a horrible situation.
But this allowed us to publish anything.
We published facsimiles of Sanskrit manuscripts.
We did.
Oh, keep it, that's amazing.
Yeah.
You could print something for, it was about four to five hundred dollars.
You could print a book, a volume.
These books were printed, you know, they started out with a lithographic.
You write on this yellow paper and then you... Yeah, stone.
It's stone paper.
And then they graduated to printing on glass, you know, making glass negatives.
And then finally they went to PhotoOpset.
And all of this was, you know, we figured that we could have them publish their own book cheaper.
then we could photocopy it.
So, every library that we gave, you know, we gave the option to any library, Harvard didn't take it.
That's too bad.
Because... Short time.
So, libraries like Yale, Virginia, Washington, Berkeley, Indiana, Texas, all...
signed up Chicago, Pennsylvania, all were members of the program.
And the books just came in and came in and came in.
And of course they were a problem because of the size.
They didn't like the blue sleeve books because if you put them through the return chute, the pages get out of order.
Right now we still have this whole thing.
Unless they're bound, they don't circulate.
So the books are like in prison.
Even here, right?
We have a few.
We only have... So what's the solution to that?
We have about 2,000 volumes in the library.
And how old is the program at Harvard?
Seven years.
I've been here seven years now.
So that's it.
So it's a new program.
You wouldn't have it without...
His contributions, basically.
No, they were there before.
We had 2,000 bosses before.
They were exchanged on the leave with the University of Texas.
See what happened.
I'm reading in the New York Times here.
It says he was the first Tibetan expert.
He literally made Tibetan studies possible.
Well, that's true.
The chairman of the Asian Languages and Cultures Department.
We had no Tibetan books.
I'm calling you.
Den Shung said, go and find them.
Find the important books and get them published.
Yeah, that's what he said.
That's what he said, and that's what you did.
It's amazing, isn't it?
Well, it was his idea.
So I went around to the Library of Congress.
A lot of people have good ideas.
But you have to figure out a way that the bureaucrats will accept.
Bureaucracy is all.
I went around and there was a field director there, was a woman named... Are we talking in Washington now or so?
Huh?
You said you went around, wait, where are you at this point?
In New Delhi, I was a student.
It worked, it worked, it worked.
Was it 1960?
65, 66.
I went around and I said, you know, I've been told you're making terrible mistakes on the Romanization of Tibet.
They were putting A's after every letter.
And Lopanamda, the Bumbo Rama, said, look, you've got to get them to understand.
He said, they won't listen to me.
He was just the high law.
I'm just a local.
So I went around and said, you know, I think you'd better fix this.
And so they did.
And then I was asked to start making romanization tables.
to get things into the computer.
So he did the Tibetan and I did tables for everything from Dvehi, the language of Sri Lanka, I mean of the Maldives, to Sindhi.
I did probably twenty-five Romanization tables.
and then you have to get them through the scholarly community so that they will adopt it.
But for my purposes, explain what a romanization table is?
A romanization table is so you can... So is that a stone of... Yeah, no, it's so you can key it into the computer.
So you don't have to... You can't use the script.
You can't use the script.
So Tibetan, we use Wiley.
They don't like Wiley.
They use another different system.
So that the, it represents more or less what, what is it.
I see.
Okay, I understand.
Wow.
So, so, so, just using the Latin alphabet to represent the Tibetan.
I see.
Yeah.
Uh, so this was what we were, we were doing, but Tibetan was just a small part of it that I was, I was interested in.
Right.
Okay.
Hey, Cameron.
So, hey, I found that other volume of the, uh, Nimei Yubim, it's on the table.
Okay.
And another volume of the, uh, of the, uh, Jocelyn Pojo.
So, about a decade later, a little over, about a decade later, you, uh, rose to the... Yeah.
Uh, how many, how many people were working at, about a hundred, a hundred and twenty?
A hundred and seventeen.
That was the max, and... So, he came, uh, off the street, ten years, and ten years later, you ran the place.
And then from there, I, it just got too complicated,
to stay in India because of the whole business of the ties that one builds up.
Too many visa cases.
And so I moved to— But this was out for twenty-some-odd years.
I moved to Indonesia, where we did some interesting projects.
There we were working on Mele, old
not old, but modern Malay literature, written by a Chinese, which is called Veronica.
And there were libraries that had all of this stuff.
You know, in the United States we didn't have it, we gave everybody sort of a look down their nose at us, you know, cheap fiction.
And so we built up a library of this on microphones.
That was one of the projects.
We were also working on romanization.
for Buddhist language or .
But still, you seem to have been embarked on doing two different .
That was my work.
One for yourself and one for L.C., though.
Yeah, right.
And I'm curious as to how you, what motivated you to do it, you see, all of it, as resulted in .
Well, it was just because I was interested in, and I continued to
to collect from China all throughout the period.
I had that for yourself, or for Elsie, or for myself, because by that time I was in Egypt or in Indonesia, and the books would come.
So I have, I think, probably the best collection of Chinese books from the eighties.
So you must have known that you were involved, I mean, clearly you had to know that you embarked on a program of preservation.
What were you thinking about as you were putting all this stuff together?
If you're not an antiquarian, and you're not a collector, and you're not a librarian, per se, although I think that could be argued, you certainly are an archivist of some... I think we could define you... I was interested, and I thought, stupidly, that I could read these books, all of them.
Oh, you can.
Read all of them, right?
It's enough for all of them.
There's just too many.
Tibetan studies, in the last three years, Tibetan studies,
There's no resemblance whatsoever now as what it did 30 years ago.
No resemblance.
And why is that?
Because of the enormous amount of literature.
That's an album.
Even 15 years ago, anybody who is content and interested could have a kind of an overview of what was there.
That's impossible at this point in time that one person could do something like this with a culture, a major world culture.
Interesting.
It's fascinating.
It's amazing.
It is amazing.
And you just seem so, uh, modest about it.
There's nothing nice about it.
Yeah, it's wonderful.
Wonderful.
You said you recorded in the Globe piece, um, as saying that you would like to see all this material go back to Chicago, to China?
Yeah, that, that... Why is that?
Why China?
I mean...
Because they don't have all of this stuff, they can be trusted in your view?
Well, eventually they can.
I mean, you could get some admiration to take place here.
Of course.
I mean, I could see something terrible happening here.
You know, already we're going to nuke Iraq.
Something bad, yeah.
Who knows?
I mean, I just think that we need to heal that divide.
Where Buddhism will survive is in China, not here.
But this is also a scholarly resource, though.
But you're copying it, so it's not like the information goes back to China.
I mean, it will all be copied before it goes.
And we're going to put sets of the scans
In a number of places, I sort of thought of two Buddhist centers and two academic.
Obviously, we might want to have Harvard be one and some other place where the raw scans would stay and somebody would ensure that they would be possible.
one software to the next and one computer system to the next, somebody's making sure that the stuff is migrating successfully, because that's a huge issue as you know today.
You know, Jeff is talking now about DVDs, and I said, well, how do we know that DVD is here to stay?
It'll be something better, but we've got to have somebody who's going to migrate this stuff.
And Harvard
The only problem I have with Harvard is, is there the will and the commitment to preserve the digital file?
That's the question.
You know, Cornell has some experience in this area, of course.
They've done Southeast Asian stuff.
Yeah.
You know John Badgley?
I don't know Badgley.
I've talked to John Dean up there.
I do mean to talk to Badgley at some point.
Oh, that Cambodian project.
Yeah, I'm writing one of the Cambodian projects in this next book.
You've talked to Judy?
I haven't talked to Judy yet.
I intend to, but I've been to Cornell and a number of interviews out there.
Mainly I wanted to know what they were doing with the stuff.
This goes back five or six years, you know, that I've been on this.
Yeah, well... Is she still there?
Is she still a friend?
I don't think so.
I think she's gone off to another job.
I'm going to search for her.
You can find her.
You can find her, I'm sure.
This Google is really something else.
I have a book coming out this fall, just on book hunting, and I just say, it's Google.
It's unbelievable.
Yeah.
I just, I love that.
But we cannot hide anymore.
No.
If you have an aboveboard job, there's no way you can hide.
That's right.
And you're always successful.
I think that's very...
But the thing is, if you hit, I'm feeling lucky, ninety percent of the time it gives you exactly what you're looking for.
Instead of even wading through everything else, I'll just give you the one right there.
It's such a marvelous search engine.
It's unbelievable.
I was at a thing here, a digital reality, it was two years ago, Tim Brenner's lead, he's the guy that invented the World Wide Web, and he said, all I use is Google.
And that was enough of a test for me.
And it is fantastic.
Anyway, I'm sorry.
See, these were things that we worked with.
We worked with that Cambodian project when I was in Indonesia with Judy and John Badgley.
Badgley, where is he now?
He's out at the University of Washington.
He's somebody worthwhile talking to.
B-A-D-G-L-E-Y.
John, right?
Yeah, he's a Burma specialist.
Where is he?
You'll find him later.
He is...
Somebody told me that he is filling in for, no, Judy has gone off, spent a couple of years in Vietnam, Judy Henchie, and John is filling in for her.
That title, by the way, is, those are the names of the lines in front of the New York Public Library.
Ah, yes, I believe that.
Some people think it's a Jane Austen novel.
No.
And it's a fun book.
I'm sorry, Gene, I keep bouncing around here, but I'm reading the Times pieces, which I'm amazed I didn't
So China is the place.
It's the final resting place.
This is an artifactual decision.
We have the scans.
But it's going to be some time before the developing world can really use these digital images.
A lot of the technology is going fast.
There's a real fear that
You know, this is something we don't want.
We want the ink print books.
We want to feel them, we want to smell them.
You don't buy into that?
No.
Oh, I certainly do.
You do.
Oh, yes.
You do buy into it.
Yes, you have to.
I like books.
Yeah, you have to.
What about newspapers?
Well, you know, Nick Baker and all this.
I don't read newspapers.
I'm fine with that.
But then again, I hate to see them.
He'd like to have them bound and preserved in the library.
Yeah, but you know, the BPL saves all their newspapers.
I mean, it's not that hard.
If you can say, why shouldn't there be a hard?
The New York Times does not keep a hard copy of its own paper.
That's unbelievable to me.
Not even, and they can use color now, so they didn't even keep a copy of the color.
I mean, that's, but that's a philosophy.
That's philosophy.
But when you show me a book that is like this, and it's loose-leaf, there has to be something there in the reading
Well, because you read it, of course, horizontally, and with both hands you lift the page and fold it over with your backside.
And then again, you read to the front, and with both hands, it's not like flipping a page.
But what we're doing now with our scans is we're able to print from those PDFs.
We're able to print a book.
at, what do you say, seven dollars a volume at Kinko's.
Seven dollars a volume?
Yeah.
That's cheap, isn't it?
I think it's cheap.
Make sure you use good paper, though, too.
Make sure you use archival paper.
That's probably the cheapest grade paper, too.
Well, I don't know.
And from a Tibetan journal, did they run this or anything?
Yeah.
I'll put some David's bit.
Well, they're all going, you know, the stuff that we've got.
You know, I'm having problems with figuring out what to do.
We have the original, and then we have the reprint.
The original is so fragile, and then the reprint is going to be that way.
We had discussed at some point the importance of a mentor in reading.
That so many Tibetan books, even if you can read in a language, can't really be picked up and read.
You need somebody to explain them.
This continues to be part of the... It still is very much.
I mean, you try to understand.
I mean, there's always going to be words that you're not going to understand.
If you take a great scholar like Pema Karpo,
I wouldn't want to try to translate him without somebody who knows his dialect.
He wrote in a dialect, the Kongbo dialect, and if you don't know the dialect, you miss.
What are you missing, exactly?
You miss what it really means.
It's just like Chinese.
It's just one, two, three, four syllables.
So is it possible if you're
readers, the mentors die out?
What's the tradition of replication with people?
That is a problem.
When we talk about Cambodia, Khmer Rouge and all that, they killed all these monks.
And when you talk about palm leaf manuscripts, there was a whole tradition there.
You had to have these monks who were the copyists.
Have you been in touch with Peter Skilling?
Yeah, we have.
You should be in touch with Peter Skilling.
He's from Bangkok.
And he has put together an enormous library of Peter Skilling.
How do we spell?
S-K-I-L-L-I-N-G.
And where is he from?
Canadian.
He's Canadian.
He's in Bangkok now?
He's in Bangkok.
He has a huge library of palm-leaf manuscripts from Burma, Cambodia.
From Burma.
What happened is when the Kurens started looting the Burmese monasteries in the Burman area, all these manuscripts came across the border in order to be exchanged for guns.
The first things that came were the gold on blue, the pretty ones.
You could get a bit of ammunition for one of those.
But then they started palm leaves.
And it was a question.
Is it worse to say that you're buying them?
Because then more would get stolen.
Yeah, that's right.
But they were being sold off page by page for people to illuminate.
And when was this?
About the same time as the... No, this was 1978.
About the same time as the Pol Pot thing.
And the currents are Christians.
And they were in rebellion against the...